# Do we need an IG working group?

Breakout discussion

**Leads**: Amy Tilbrook (UoE)

## Proposal

Breakout discussions are open talks around a topic. They are open ended, and while we hope actions and collaboration arise from them, there is no specific output expected by the end of the session.

### Prompts

- Is there a perception of lack of IG knowledge in UK TRE community ("an IG black hole"?)
- What support would benefit the community?
 
A) Specific IG working group? Thoughts on:
- remit/purpose
- membership
- how it would work
	 
B) Is IG an element in ALL working groups? (as per previous group days:  "working groups need a purpose, as creating and maintaining one takes effort, many people are interested in everything/all groups"). How could this be supported?
 
 
C) Something else?
 
- Previous suggestions for remit of an IG working group:
 - "Something around Information Governance and policies" e.g. ISO27001 and also local e.g. University policies
 - Advice from contributors for specific issues - 
 - Aligning strategies for dealing with TRE-specific IG challenges - e.g. AI/ML, commercial access, international access


### Summary

Open discussion on the need of an Information Governance working group, its potential remit and possible members.

### Preparation

No required preparation beyond an open mind!



### Target audience

No specific target audience in mind - anybody interested!